<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/x9sxmahEI2s?si=7N2M1kHs-k-wnikf" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" allowfullscreen></iframe>

all right, now, do me a favor and close your eyes for just a minute. And imagine a world without, a world without homelessness, a world without food deprivation, and a world without abuse, a world without oppression where the Arts can Inspire and beautify, and a World Without Limits where people who need help can get it and the people who want to help can afford to give it.

can you picture that? now open your eyes, let's talk about how to make that Vision a reality.  many changes need to happen but we need to start with two and part of that is reimagining the non-profit paradigm. 
we expect non-profits to do the Herculean work of making our world a better place to live, work and play. but at the same time we make that task nearly impossible by hobbling them at every step. so I wish there was some easy answer but you and I both know there isn't. 
what I do know is that we can make a real difference and that will start with our relationship with the non-profit sector.
first we need to change how the public perceives non-profits and second we need to change how non-profits perceive and value themselves. 

first let's start with educating the public on what it actually means to be a non-profit. the actual word here non-profit is the primary roadblock. non-profit does not mean that you cannot make money on events and services or that you have to operate at a loss. that doesn't make any sense. no successful organization or business can survive very long in a Perpetual Financial deficit, right, makes no sense. 
so what non-profit really means is that it's a tax status that indicates that organizations do not generate profits for their owners and that no portion of their income is distributed to their members and directors and officers.
now that's why donations to non-profit charities are generally tax deductible because that money is going to support a non-profit Mission and not to line the pockets of shareholders.
so successful fundraising Endeavors that generate profits to help nonprofits operate in the black need to be lauded and supported and not criticized and looked at with suspicion.

it's time to reject the harmful myth that non-profits cannot and worse should not make money. 
it's also time to get rid of the concept of mandatory low overhead. 
so in response to some isolated sector scandals non-profit Overlord watch groups decided that non-profit overheads should never exceed 20 of their budget especially when it comes to fundraising.
it makes no no sense at all, but this low overhead Direct Services only concept caught on and was fanatically accepted by donors and Foundations and theGeneral Public. non-profit leaders in fear of losing their funding had no choice but to adopt it as well. now don't get me wrong keeping overhead low is a smart business move but this artificial limit restricts growth threatens the infrastructure and makes it difficult if not actually impossible for non-profits to do their job well. 

I get it most donors want their money to go to Direct Services because that makes them feel good and proactive and responsible. but even in a perfect world that just isn't realistic, because overheadexpenses are necessary to Steward the success of a non-profit. and those those expenses include things like administrative payroll the power supply uh internet phone fundraising liability insurance sure. non-profits can misuse funds just like any organization or business can but why in the world would you just expect that they're going to. 
we need to trust non-profits and rather than championing this overhead limit that kneecaps progress and accomplishment. we need to engage stakeholders for accountability. we need to look at theactual costs and benchmarks of organizational success and we need to turn the dialogue to a non-profit's impact and effectiveness. 

now with all of that in mind let's look at the other major change that needs to happen non-profits need to be allowed to Value themselves. they need to Value the important far-reaching high impact work that they do and promote themselves accordingly, and in part this means that non-profit board members need to step up and educate the public that non-profits are bound by two bottom linesa. financial bottom line to stay open and be able to make money like any business does but then there's also a mission bottom line to keep their non-profit status and to do the job that they were actually created to do, and for non-profits this usually means offering a service or a product at well below market value if not actually free. 
that's why fundraising is so very important and why this fixed overhead without Mission value is so very detrimental. 

valuing themselves also means that non-profits need to compensate theirleaders at an appropriate living wage. now many non-profits especially small single community and Rural non-profits are led by Passion and proximity. their leader is a person who is passionate about the mission and is available to spearhead the project. but that doesn't mean that that leader has the knowledge and the skills necessary to Usher that non-profit forward successfully, because there's a Labyrinth of rules and regulations that nonprofits need to follow.

for example, did you know that non-profits are required to register inevery state that they fundraise in, regardless of whether it's active or passive solicitation. so what this means is if a non-profit sends out an email newsletter that has like a little donate button in the corner that's passive solicitation or that newsletter is actually a request for funding which is active solicitation, that non-profit is required to register in almost every state that that email ends up in. there's only eight states that do not require this solicitation registration. all of the others require theregistration most along with a not insubstantial annual fee and some require special annual reports. to not register puts a non-profit at risk of fines and legal action not to mention that they may not be able to get funding and grants from that state. 
there's a myriad of things that nonprofits need to do. I got my MPA Masters in public administration about eight years into my tenure as a passion non-profit leader. right, I had no idea that these fundraising things were even important and that isn't even thetip of the iceberg what about HIPAA versus Ada confidentiality laws, overtime laws. uh the difference between small rights Grand rights and mechanical rights in the Performing Arts, about HR legalities Public Health laws liability issues, the list of leadership responsibilities that is not covered by Passion and proximity Is endless. non-profits like any successful for-profit Venture needs to have educated and inspired leadership and the only way to get that reliably is to pay for it.

now there's a concept known as psychicincome and this is the Good Feeling a person gets doing work that they're passionate about. it's also the concept that non-profits use to not pay their leaders a living wage. and you know we've got to keep the overhead low but I can tell you from experience that psychic income does not pay the bills. non-profit leaders need to be paid commensurate with their skill set experience and workload and not be expected or Worse guilted into working incredibly long hours for low pay. losing integral qualified staff to ahigher paying job or to burn out is what non-profits can least afford. like what is the opportunity cost of saving twenty thousand dollars a year in payroll. how many people who needed Services didn't get it, how many new opportunities and exciting programs and potential donors are missed, how much money is spent training replacement staff over and over again, and what in the world are nonprofits going to do when they find out that the up and coming Talent is not willing to give up their work-life balance or workfor less than they know that they're worth.

we have to stop buying into the idea that it is morally wrong to pay non-profit employees a living wage simply because they work for a non-profit charity. we expect non-profits to serve our society's most at-risk and underprivileged populations we ask them to bring Beauty, health, art to our communities. we give our elderly our youth our veterans and our animals into their care, and we ask them to tackle society's most traumatic and difficult issues homelessnessm, food insecurity, domesticviolence, child abuse.
all of these activities take skill knowledge empathy experience and top-notch Leadership. Dan palata, a non-profit fundraiser turned speaker activist said it best when he suggested that we need to flip the script. we need to stop considering non-profit employees as making money off of the needy and instead we need to understand and accept that they are actually people earning money off of the value that they add to the world. leadership is a critical skill worthy of Equitable compensation, and we have tostop conflating charity work with self-deprivation. psychic income should be an intangible bonus not a compensation staple.

another way that non-profits need to honor themselves is to honor creativity Innovation and education. non-profits need to be willing to invest in themselves and that means that they need larger budgets for overhead and indirect expenses. they need to spend more money on marketing, people cannot use or support a program or a service that they don't even know exists. non-profits need to try new and exciting fundraising ideas. they do not need to deliver every dollar into Direct Services without thought for the future. planning for the future is responsible and smart and frankly it's good fiduciary stewardship. Mission oriented services are necessary of course. but those Services go away if a non-profit has to shut its doors the following month. non-profits and the public need to understand and accept that it is okay. no no it's imperative that non-profits spend money on fundraising events that generate profits to keep the doors open and the missionmoving forward.

continuing education is also an important and necessary expense. inexpensive and free workshops are a great resource but do non-profits actually believe that a hundred and fifty dollar afternoon Workshop is going to bring in twenty thousand dollars in return. is there a business person here who believes that a 150 dollar investment will return an annual 13 000 percent so. then why do we insist on forcing that thought process on investing in our non-profit leaders. non-profits must invest in the talent, training and systems that build a foundation for Healthy Growth. 

we live in a society that values the new and the exciting and the flashy. how can non-profits expect to be successful in that world when they're Bound by the governing concepts of no overhead, no risk and self-deprivation. we have to let go of the Antiquated and wrongly moralistic attitude that keeps non-profits from fulfilling their potential. if you're a donor or a granter, stop asking non-profits to spend all their money on Direct Services with nooverhead. overhead supports the mission every bit as much as the direct services do. if you're a board member step up to facilitate your organization's need for personnel education and marketing. explain those needs to your community and make sure that your donors and your funders know that their support and trust is the Bedrock of non-profit excellence. 

everyone needs to accept and understand that low wages, no benefits and excessive workloads are unsustainable and are actively destroying the non-profit sector. we need to not equate non-profit with resource poor, and we all need to speak up to support Dynamic leadership just compensation fundraising and planning for the future. every one of us is a stakeholder in the success of our shared community and together we can give non-profits the resources and room to absolutely soar and just imagine what our world without can look like then, thank you.
